PoS(ICHEP2022)980
Porting DIRAC Benchmark to Python3: impact of the
discrepancies and solutions
Alexandre F. Boyer,𝑎,𝑏,∗Imane Iraoui,𝑐Federico Stagni,𝑏Christophe Haen𝑏and
David R.C. Hill𝑎
𝑎Université Clermont Auvergne, Clermont Auvergne INP, CNRS, Mines Saint-Etienne, LIMOS,
Clermont-Ferrand, France
𝑏European Organization for Nuclear Research,
Meyrin, Switzerland
𝑐Al Akhawayn University,
Ifrane, Morocco
E-mail: alexandre.franck.boyer@cern.ch, iraoui.imane@gmail.com,
federico.stagni@cern.ch, christophe.haen@cern.ch, david.hill@uca.fr
To progress in their research, scientific communities generally rely on shared computing resources
aggregated into clusters. To provide fair use of the computing resources to every user, admin-
istrators of these clusters set up Local Resources Management Systems. They orchestrate the
scientific workloads and the resources by allowing a given workload to be executed for a certain
time on a definite number of CPUs or machines. To maximize the use of the computing re-
sources and avoid running out of time, users may assess their environments by executing fast CPU
benchmarking solutions such as DIRAC Benchmark. Developed in Python 2 in 2012, DIRAC
Benchmark has been mainly and successfully employed in the context of the LHCb experiment.
Now that Python 2 is deprecated, DIRAC Benchmark has to be ported to Python 3. This paper
describes this transition, the impact brought by the changes, and the considered solutions. The
main contributions of this paper are: (i) various methods to improve and maintain the program,
such as unit tests, a Continuous Integration and Delivery pipeline; (ii) a comprehensive analysis
of the discrepancies. The problems were addressed by applying a constant factor on the scores
depending on the underlying CPU model and Python version used.
41st International Conference on High Energy physics - ICHEP2022
6-13 July, 2022
Bologna, Italy
∗Speaker
© Copyright owned by the author(s) under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).
https://pos.sissa.it/

PoS(ICHEP2022)980
Porting DIRAC Benchmark to Python3: impact of the discrepancies and solutions
Alexandre F. Boyer
1.
Introduction
In this paper, we focus on DIRAC Benchmark, a fast CPU benchmarking tool developed by
the LHCb collaboration in 2012[1]. DIRAC Benchmark has been primarily created to estimate
the correlation between the power of a given CPU and the execution of Gauss [2], a Monte-Carlo
simulation application replicating collisions occurring in the LHCb detector.
The tool, written in Python 2, has worked fine for several years but requires a major update now.
Indeed, Python 2 was declared deprecated in January 2020 [3] and, therefore, DIRAC Benchmark
has to be ported in Python 3. While most of these portability changes are minor, some optimizations
of the code might lead to consequent issues in the benchmark tool that could lead to wrong CPU
power estimations. This paper describes the work done to port DIRAC Benchmark to Python 3,
evaluates the impact of the changes and provides solutions to correct the CPU power estimations.
2.
CPU Benchmarking tools in High Energy Physics
Valassi et al. propose a comprehensive review of CPU benchmarking tools in High Energy
Physics [4]. They address their evolution and limitations in this context. Developers from the LHCb
experiment have specifically studied DIRAC Benchmark. Stagni and Charpentier developed elastic
Gauss jobs depending on DIRAC Benchmark estimations [5]. Charpentier also noticed issues with
HS06 and proposed an update of DIRAC Benchmark in 2017 to better fit with the LHCb workload
[6].
3.
Updating DIRAC Benchmark
We need to make sure that the benchmark will still provide valuable and accurate scores in
Python 3 and beyond. Indeed, developers of Python 3 have included numerous optimizations and
changes compared to Python 2. We also need to provide a portable package so that users can directly
import the benchmark in their applications.
The first step consists in providing tools to maintain a clean and well-tested code before the
transition. We reformatted the code using Black, a style guide auto-formatter for Python Code
compliant with Python Enhancement Proposals 8 (PEP8) [7]. We also developed unit tests with
pytest [8] to cover the program. Finally, we set up a continuous integration (CI) pipeline based
on GitHub Actions [9] to better handle future changes in the code. To help developers to produce
quality code, we also included a pre-commit [10] module in the repository. It automatically formats
the code using Black and performs several checks before pushing the code to the repository.
The second step introduces the transition to Python 3.9. The program only relies on standard
Python libraries and contains about 300 lines of code.
Changes were minimal but generated
discrepancies in the results that are going to be analyzed in Section 4.
Finally, the last step of the transition consists in creating a Python package to embed the
benchmark and make it portable and easy to import. We completely revisited the structure of the
project by splitting the command line interface options from the code related to the benchmark and
adding configuration files to set up a package. We added a continuous delivery (CD) module to
the GitHub Actions pipeline of the project. The CD module, triggered only when a GitHub tag
2

PoS(ICHEP2022)980
Porting DIRAC Benchmark to Python3: impact of the discrepancies and solutions
Alexandre F. Boyer
is created, generates a binary wheel as well as a source tarball from the repository and publishes
the files to PyPI [11], a recognized repository of Python software. We also added the package to
Conda-Forge [12], a repository of Conda recipes, to ease the integration of the DIRAC Benchmark
in other projects.
4.
Comparing the Python 3.9 version of DIRAC Benchmark with the Python 2.7
version
We studied the potential impact of the discrepancies on various CPU models by leveraging
the computing resources of WLCG. We experimented by submitting workloads containing both
versions of the DIRAC Benchmark on 102 grid sites involving 83 different CPU models. Programs,
resources, results and figures are publicly available to facilitate the reproducibility of this work [13].
Based on the results of this experiment, we notice that Python 3.9 scores are mostly higher than
Python 2.7 scores. The gap seems to be almost constant across the scores compared. Yet we can
still distinguish two different cases: scores coming from AMD processors would need a stronger
correction than the scores coming from Intel processors. The root mean square error of the Python
3.9 scores with respect to the Python 2.7 scores is about 2.86.
To correct the Python 3.9 version of the tool, we designed a function applying a scaling factor
to a score based on the underlying architecture and Python version: 0.86 for Intel processors and
0.71 for AMD processors. The root mean square error of the transformed Python 3.9 scores with
respect to the Python 2.7 scores is about 1.19.
The solution was successfully applied to the LHCbDIRAC production environment. Neverthe-
less, it implies that developers would conduct similar experiments each time a new CPU architecture
or Python version is introduced.
5.
Comparing the Python 3.9 version of DIRAC Benchmark to the LHCb
Monte-Carlo simulations
We also compared DIRAC Benchmark scores to Gauss jobs running on WLCG. It is worth
mentioning that this experiment took place after the introduction of Python 3.9 in the LHCb
production environment, Python 2.7 being not used anymore.
The objective is to ensure the
benchmark is still adapted to the current workload or to correct it if need be. We experimented by
getting the list of the active Monte-Carlo productions. We extracted the attributes and parameters
of 4955 Gauss jobs bound to 75 productions. Jobs ran on 98 distinct CPU models across 55 sites.
Programs, resources and results are publicly available to facilitate the reproducibility of this work
[14].
Based on the results of this experiment, we notice that DIRAC Benchmark underestimates
the capabilities of the AMD processors when dealing with Gauss jobs. Disabling the corrections
introduced in section 4 provides better results on AMD CPUs but slightly less accurate results on
Intel CPUs. Given the current state of WLCG, which is mainly composed of Intel CPUs, disabling
the corrections of the benchmark would not allow LHCbDIRAC to better exploit allocations. Thus,
we chose to keep applying the corrections.
3

PoS(ICHEP2022)980
Porting DIRAC Benchmark to Python3: impact of the discrepancies and solutions
Alexandre F. Boyer
6.
Conclusion
In the last years, computing infrastructure and funding models have significantly changed,
and national science programs have consolidated computing resources and encouraged using cloud
systems as well as supercomputers. While supercomputers offer a significant amount of resources,
they are highly heterogeneous architectures, pose higher integration challenges and have not been
operated continuously for LHC experiments workload processing. HEP communities are adapting
their workloads to run on these resources including non-x86 CPUs and accelerators, such as GPUs
and FPGAs. DIRAC Benchmark has not been conceived for such use cases and would need an
important update. One of the solutions would be to study the development of the HEP-Benchmarks
suite [4] and propose a new fast benchmark solution based on it.
References
[1] DiracGrid, source code of the dirac benchmark 12, 2017.
[2] M. Clemencic, G. Corti, S. Easo, C.R. Jones, S. Miglioranzi, M. Pappagallo et al., The LHCb
simulation application, gauss: Design, evolution and experience, Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 331 (2011) 032023.
[3] T.P.S. Foundation, Sunsetting python 2, 2020.
[4] Valassi, Andrea, Alef, Manfred, Barbet, Jean-Michel, Datskova, Olga, De Maria, Riccardo,
Fontes Medeiros, Miguel et al., Using hep experiment workflows for the benchmarking and
accounting of wlcg computing resources, EPJ Web Conf. 245 (2020) 07035.
[5] F. Stagni and P. Charpentier, Jobs masonry in lhcb with elastic grid jobs, Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 664 (2015) 062060.
[6] P. Charpentier, Benchmarking worker nodes using LHCb productions and comparing with
HEPSpec06, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 898 (2017) 082011.
[7] P.S. Foundation, Black, 2021.
[8] pytest-dev team, pytest: helps you write better programs, 2021.
[9] GitHub, Github actions, 2021.
[10] pre-commit dev team, pre-commit, 2021.
[11] P.S. Foundation, Pypi, 2021.
[12] Conda-Forge, Conda-forge, 2021.
[13] A.F. Boyer and F. Stagni, Porting db12 to python3: Analysis of the scores, Aug., 2022.
10.5281/zenodo.7031029.
[14] A.F. Boyer, Porting DB12 to Python3: Comparison with LHCb Gauss tasks, Oct., 2022.
10.5281/zenodo.7199144.
4
